# Qiskit Advocate Mentorship Project Spring, 2022 [Transpiler Hackathon](https://github.com/QAMP-Spring-2022-Transpiler-Hackathon)

## Checkpoint 2

### Team

* Harshit Gupta

* Oskar Słowik

* Jack Woehr (mentor)

### General

We have been working to submit PRs on Transpiler issues with the kind assistance of Matthew Treinish and Kevin Krsulich of the IBM team.

### Issues

#### 1. Issue 7386

#### Status : <font color ='purple'> Resolved </font> 
- Pull Request [7542](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7542)

#### Description
- This issue required a change in how the transpiler decided to stop its optimization loop
- Previously if the depth of a quantum circuit was constant after an optimization pass, then the transpiler stopped its operations
- If not, the optimization loop continued
- After this PR the check was expanded to also include the size of the quantum circuit, allowing a greater level optimization.
- Files affected - 
```
qiskit/transpiler/preset_passmanagers/level1.py
qiskit/transpiler/preset_passmanagers/level2.py
qiskit/transpiler/preset_passmanagers/level3.py
test/python/transpiler/test_preset_passmanagers.py
```

#### 2. Issue 7181 

#### Status : <font color ='purple'> Resolved </font> 
- Pull Request [7913](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7913)

#### Description
- As mentioned in issue #7181, the `Optimize1qSimpleCommutation` transpiler scaled superlinearly with the number of qubits
- There were two components of the pass which were optmized :
  - <b>`_find_adjoining_run`</b> function was optimized as it had some redundant computation trying to optimize the single qubit runs.
  - Along with the above function, <b>`_commute_through`</b> logic was also changed. Previously `insert` and `delete` methods were used in the internal workings. 
  - These functions were not efficient as for a given `n` sized container, they may take `O(n)` time for execution. They were replaced by a `deque` to save on some execution time. 
- More details to be found in the pull request above.

- Files affected - 
```
qiskit/transpiler/passes/optimization/optimize_1q_commutation.py
```



#### 3. Issue 7113  

#### Status : <font color ='ligreen'> PR In Review </font> 
- Pull Request [7990](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7990)

#### Description
- This is a sub part of the larger issue #7113, to make the transpiler `Target` aware.
- The main passes which were taken up here are `Optimize1qSimpleCommutation` and `Optimize1qSimpleDecomposition`
- Essentially with `Target` interface being added in terra, there is more data available to the transpiler to inform the passes on the characteristics and constraints of a backend 
- `OptimizeSimple1qCommutation` did not have any direct dependencies for the `Target` 
- In `Optimize1qGatesDecomposition`, some changes were introduced to extend the checking of whether a gate was present in the basis set or the `Target` basis set.
- More details to be found in the pull request above.

- Files affected - 
```
qiskit/transpiler/passes/optimization/optimize_1q_commutation.py
qiskit/transpiler/passes/optimization/optimize_1q_decomposition.py
```



#### 4. Issue 7485 

#### Status : <font color ='ligreen'> PR In Review </font> 
- Pull Request [7989](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7989)

#### Description
- This issue exposes the memory leakage present in `BasisTranslator`, `DAGFixedPoint`, `BarrierBeforeFinalMeasurements` and `Decompose` transpiler passes.
- Till now, some progress has been made to optimize the `DAGFixedPoint` and the `Decompose` passes
  ##### `Decompose`
- To improve the run time performance of this pass, a change was made to the `_should_decompose` method. 
- Originally, it tried to make two variables repeatedly during the call of the method.
- This should not be the case as the lists only depend on an attribute of the pass, which is invariant during the call of the `run` method
- These variables were cached as atrributes to somewhat improve the run time of the pass.
- Work still in progress for other passes.
- For more details, please refer the pull request above.

- Files targeted - 
```
qiskit/transpiler/passes/basis/basis_translator.py
qiskit/transpiler/passes/basis/decompose.py
qiskit/transpiler/passes/utils/dag_fixed_point.py
qiskit/transpiler/passes/utils/merge_adjacent_barrier.py
qiskit/transpiler/passes/utils/barrier_before_final_measurements.py
```







